CI-CD.md, before:

# CI/CD Pipeline Documentation

## Overview
This project includes comprehensive CI/CD pipelines using both **GitHub Actions** and **Jenkins** for automated testing, building, and deployment.

---

## GitHub Actions

### Workflow File
**Location:** `.github/workflows/ci-cd.yml`

### Pipeline Jobs

#### 1. **Test Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- PostgreSQL service container
- Steps:
  - ✅ Checkout code
  - ✅ Setup Node.js 20
  - ✅ Install dependencies
  - ✅ Run linting
  - ✅ Generate Prisma Client
  - ✅ Run migrations
  - ✅ Run tests
  - ✅ Build TypeScript

#### 2. **Docker Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- Requires: Test job success
- Steps:
  - ✅ Build Docker image
  - ✅ Multi-platform build (amd64, arm64)
  - ✅ Push to Docker Hub
  - ✅ Auto-tagging (branch, sha, latest)
  - ✅ Layer caching

#### 3. **Security Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- Steps:
  - ✅ Trivy vulnerability scanning
  - ✅ Upload to GitHub Security
  - ✅ SARIF format reports

#### 4. **Deploy Job**
- Runs on: Production branch only
- Environment: production
- Customizable deployment steps

### Required Secrets

Add these to GitHub repository settings (`Settings` > `Secrets and variables` > `Actions`):

```
DOCKER_USERNAME=your-docker-username
DOCKER_PASSWORD=your-docker-password
```

### Usage

**Automatic Triggers:**
- Push to `main` or `develop` branches
- Pull requests to `main` or `develop`

**Manual Trigger:**
```bash
# Via GitHub UI: Actions > CI/CD Pipeline > Run workflow
```

---

## Jenkins Pipeline

### Jenkinsfile
**Location:** `Jenkinsfile` (root directory)

### Pipeline Stages

1. **Checkout** - Clone repository
2. **Setup** - Verify environment
3. **Install Dependencies** - `npm ci`
4. **Lint** - Code quality checks
5. **Generate Prisma Client** - Database ORM
6. **Build** - Compile TypeScript
7. **Test** - Run test suite
8. **Security Scan** (Parallel)
   - Dependency Audit
   - Trivy Scan
9. **Build Docker Image** - Create container
10. **Push Docker Image** - Push to registry (main only)
11. **Deploy to Staging** - Develop branch
12. **Deploy to Production** - Main branch
13. **Health Check** - Verify deployment

### Jenkins Credentials

Configure in Jenkins (`Manage Jenkins` > `Credentials`):

**Docker Hub:**
```
ID: docker-hub-credentials
Type: Username with password
Username: your-docker-username
Password: your-docker-password
```

**Database URL:**
```
ID: database-url
Type: Secret text
Secret: postgresql://user:pass@host:5432/db
```

### Jenkins Setup

#### 1. Install Plugins
- Docker Pipeline
- Pipeline
- Git
- Credentials Binding
- Email Extension (optional)
- Slack Notification (optional)

#### 2. Create Pipeline Job
```
1. New Item > Pipeline
2. Name: expense-tracker-backend
3. Pipeline > Definition: Pipeline script from SCM
4. SCM: Git
5. Repository URL: https://github.com/JScoder4005/auth-backend.git
6. Branch: */main
7. Script Path: Jenkinsfile
```

#### 3. Configure Webhooks
```bash
# GitHub webhook URL
https://your-jenkins-url/github-webhook/

# Events to trigger: Push events, Pull requests
```

---

## Pipeline Features

### ✅ Automated Testing
- Linting with ESLint
- Unit/Integration tests
- Database migrations
- Build verification

### ✅ Security
- Dependency vulnerability scanning
- Container image scanning (Trivy)
- SARIF report upload
- Audit logs

### ✅ Docker Integration
- Multi-stage builds
- Multi-platform support (amd64, arm64)
- Layer caching
- Auto-tagging
- Registry push

### ✅ Deployment
- Staging environment (develop)
- Production environment (main)
- Health checks
- Rollback capability

### ✅ Notifications
- Build status
- Deployment alerts
- Failure notifications

---

## Environment-Specific Configs

### Development
```yaml
Branch: develop
Deploy to: staging
Database: staging-db
Auto-deploy: Yes
```

### Production
```yaml
Branch: main
Deploy to: production
Database: prod-db
Auto-deploy: Yes (after tests pass)
Manual approval: Optional
```

---

## Deployment Options

### Option 1: Docker Compose
```bash
# SSH to server
ssh user@production-server

# Pull and restart
cd /app
docker-compose pull
docker-compose up -d
```

### Option 2: Kubernetes
```bash
# Update deployment
kubectl set image deployment/backend \
  backend=jscoder4005/expense-tracker-backend:latest

# Verify rollout
kubectl rollout status deployment/backend
```

### Option 3: AWS ECS/Fargate
```bash
# Update service
aws ecs update-service \
  --cluster production \
  --service backend \
  --force-new-deployment
```

### Option 4: Railway/Render
```bash
# Automatic deployment via Docker image
# Configure in platform dashboard
```

---

## Monitoring Pipeline

### GitHub Actions
```bash
# View in GitHub
Repository > Actions > CI/CD Pipeline

# Download logs
Actions > Workflow run > Download logs
```

### Jenkins
```bash
# View in Jenkins
Dashboard > expense-tracker-backend > Build History

# Console output
Build > Console Output
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Tests Failing
```bash
# Check database connection
- Verify DATABASE_URL
- Ensure PostgreSQL is running
- Check migration status
```

### Docker Build Failing
```bash
# Check Dockerfile
- Verify base image
- Check COPY paths
- Verify build context
```

### Deployment Failing
```bash
# Verify credentials
- Docker registry login
- SSH access
- Cloud provider credentials
```

### Security Scan Failures
```bash
# Update dependencies
npm audit fix

# Review Trivy results
# Fix high/critical vulnerabilities
```

---

## Best Practices

### ✅ Always Test Locally First
```bash
# Run tests
npm test

# Build Docker image
docker build -t test .

# Test container
docker run -p 5000:5000 test
```

### ✅ Use Branch Protection
- Require PR reviews
- Require status checks
- Require up-to-date branches

### ✅ Monitor Build Times
- Optimize dependencies
- Use caching
- Parallel stages

### ✅ Secure Secrets
- Never commit secrets
- Use secret management
- Rotate credentials regularly

---

## Performance Metrics

| Metric | Target | Actual |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Build Time | <5 min | ~3 min |
| Test Time | <2 min | ~1 min |
| Docker Build | <3 min | ~2 min |
| Deploy Time | <5 min | ~3 min |
| **Total** | **<15 min** | **~9 min** |

---

## Next Steps

1. **Configure Secrets** - Add Docker Hub credentials
2. **Test Pipeline** - Push to trigger build
3. **Review Results** - Check all stages pass
4. **Configure Deployment** - Set up target environment
5. **Enable Notifications** - Slack/Email alerts
6. **Monitor** - Track build success rate

---

## Summary

✅ **GitHub Actions** - Cloud-native CI/CD  
✅ **Jenkins** - Self-hosted pipeline  
✅ **Multi-Platform** - AMD64 & ARM64 support  
✅ **Security Scanning** - Trivy integration  
✅ **Automated Deployment** - Main branch auto-deploy  
✅ **Health Monitoring** - Post-deployment checks  

Both pipelines are production-ready and fully automated!

Commit message:

docs: add security notices for placeholder credentials
- Add IMPORTANT notice clarifying all credentials are placeholders
- Add CAUTION notice for Jenkins credentials section
- Change placeholder format to <your-value> syntax
- Emphasize never committing real secrets
- Clarify GitHub Secrets are stored securely
- Fix GitHub security scan alert about password patterns

CI-CD.md, after:

# CI/CD Pipeline Documentation

## Overview
This project includes comprehensive CI/CD pipelines using both **GitHub Actions** and **Jenkins** for automated testing, building, and deployment.

---

## GitHub Actions

### Workflow File
**Location:** `.github/workflows/ci-cd.yml`

### Pipeline Jobs

#### 1. **Test Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- PostgreSQL service container
- Steps:
  - ✅ Checkout code
  - ✅ Setup Node.js 20
  - ✅ Install dependencies
  - ✅ Run linting
  - ✅ Generate Prisma Client
  - ✅ Run migrations
  - ✅ Run tests
  - ✅ Build TypeScript

#### 2. **Docker Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- Requires: Test job success
- Steps:
  - ✅ Build Docker image
  - ✅ Multi-platform build (amd64, arm64)
  - ✅ Push to Docker Hub
  - ✅ Auto-tagging (branch, sha, latest)
  - ✅ Layer caching

#### 3. **Security Job**
- Runs on: `ubuntu-latest`
- Steps:
  - ✅ Trivy vulnerability scanning
  - ✅ Upload to GitHub Security
  - ✅ SARIF format reports

#### 4. **Deploy Job**
- Runs on: Production branch only
- Environment: production
- Customizable deployment steps

### Required Secrets

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Security Notice:** All credential examples below are PLACEHOLDERS ONLY. Never commit real passwords or secrets to your repository. Always use GitHub Secrets or environment variables for actual credentials.

Add these to GitHub repository settings (`Settings` > `Secrets and variables` > `Actions`):

```
DOCKER_USERNAME=<your-actual-docker-username>
DOCKER_PASSWORD=<your-actual-docker-token>
```

**Note:** These are stored securely in GitHub and never exposed in logs or code.

### Usage

**Automatic Triggers:**
- Push to `main` or `develop` branches
- Pull requests to `main` or `develop`

**Manual Trigger:**
```bash
# Via GitHub UI: Actions > CI/CD Pipeline > Run workflow
```

---

## Jenkins Pipeline

### Jenkinsfile
**Location:** `Jenkinsfile` (root directory)

### Pipeline Stages

1. **Checkout** - Clone repository
2. **Setup** - Verify environment
3. **Install Dependencies** - `npm ci`
4. **Lint** - Code quality checks
5. **Generate Prisma Client** - Database ORM
6. **Build** - Compile TypeScript
7. **Test** - Run test suite
8. **Security Scan** (Parallel)
   - Dependency Audit
   - Trivy Scan
9. **Build Docker Image** - Create container
10. **Push Docker Image** - Push to registry (main only)
11. **Deploy to Staging** - Develop branch
12. **Deploy to Production** - Main branch
13. **Health Check** - Verify deployment

### Jenkins Credentials

Configure in Jenkins (`Manage Jenkins` > `Credentials`):

> [!CAUTION]
> **Never commit real credentials!** The examples below use placeholder syntax. Replace with your actual credentials only in Jenkins UI.

**Docker Hub:**
```
ID: docker-hub-credentials
Type: Username with password
Username: <your-docker-hub-username>
Password: <your-docker-hub-access-token>
```

**Database URL:**
```
ID: database-url
Type: Secret text
Secret: postgresql://<username>:<password>@<host>:<port>/<database>
```

### Jenkins Setup

#### 1. Install Plugins
- Docker Pipeline
- Pipeline
- Git
- Credentials Binding
- Email Extension (optional)
- Slack Notification (optional)

#### 2. Create Pipeline Job
```
1. New Item > Pipeline
2. Name: expense-tracker-backend
3. Pipeline > Definition: Pipeline script from SCM
4. SCM: Git
5. Repository URL: https://github.com/JScoder4005/auth-backend.git
6. Branch: */main
7. Script Path: Jenkinsfile
```

#### 3. Configure Webhooks
```bash
# GitHub webhook URL
https://your-jenkins-url/github-webhook/

# Events to trigger: Push events, Pull requests
```

---

## Pipeline Features

### ✅ Automated Testing
- Linting with ESLint
- Unit/Integration tests
- Database migrations
- Build verification

### ✅ Security
- Dependency vulnerability scanning
- Container image scanning (Trivy)
- SARIF report upload
- Audit logs

### ✅ Docker Integration
- Multi-stage builds
- Multi-platform support (amd64, arm64)
- Layer caching
- Auto-tagging
- Registry push

### ✅ Deployment
- Staging environment (develop)
- Production environment (main)
- Health checks
- Rollback capability

### ✅ Notifications
- Build status
- Deployment alerts
- Failure notifications

---

## Environment-Specific Configs

### Development
```yaml
Branch: develop
Deploy to: staging
Database: staging-db
Auto-deploy: Yes
```

### Production
```yaml
Branch: main
Deploy to: production
Database: prod-db
Auto-deploy: Yes (after tests pass)
Manual approval: Optional
```

---

## Deployment Options

### Option 1: Docker Compose
```bash
# SSH to server
ssh user@production-server

# Pull and restart
cd /app
docker-compose pull
docker-compose up -d
```

### Option 2: Kubernetes
```bash
# Update deployment
kubectl set image deployment/backend \
  backend=jscoder4005/expense-tracker-backend:latest

# Verify rollout
kubectl rollout status deployment/backend
```

### Option 3: AWS ECS/Fargate
```bash
# Update service
aws ecs update-service \
  --cluster production \
  --service backend \
  --force-new-deployment
```

### Option 4: Railway/Render
```bash
# Automatic deployment via Docker image
# Configure in platform dashboard
```

---

## Monitoring Pipeline

### GitHub Actions
```bash
# View in GitHub
Repository > Actions > CI/CD Pipeline

# Download logs
Actions > Workflow run > Download logs
```

### Jenkins
```bash
# View in Jenkins
Dashboard > expense-tracker-backend > Build History

# Console output
Build > Console Output
```

---

## Troubleshooting

### Tests Failing
```bash
# Check database connection
- Verify DATABASE_URL
- Ensure PostgreSQL is running
- Check migration status
```

### Docker Build Failing
```bash
# Check Dockerfile
- Verify base image
- Check COPY paths
- Verify build context
```

### Deployment Failing
```bash
# Verify credentials
- Docker registry login
- SSH access
- Cloud provider credentials
```

### Security Scan Failures
```bash
# Update dependencies
npm audit fix

# Review Trivy results
# Fix high/critical vulnerabilities
```

---

## Best Practices

### ✅ Always Test Locally First
```bash
# Run tests
npm test

# Build Docker image
docker build -t test .

# Test container
docker run -p 5000:5000 test
```

### ✅ Use Branch Protection
- Require PR reviews
- Require status checks
- Require up-to-date branches

### ✅ Monitor Build Times
- Optimize dependencies
- Use caching
- Parallel stages

### ✅ Secure Secrets
- Never commit secrets
- Use secret management
- Rotate credentials regularly

---

## Performance Metrics

| Metric | Target | Actual |
|--------|--------|--------|
| Build Time | <5 min | ~3 min |
| Test Time | <2 min | ~1 min |
| Docker Build | <3 min | ~2 min |
| Deploy Time | <5 min | ~3 min |
| **Total** | **<15 min** | **~9 min** |

---

## Next Steps

1. **Configure Secrets** - Add Docker Hub credentials
2. **Test Pipeline** - Push to trigger build
3. **Review Results** - Check all stages pass
4. **Configure Deployment** - Set up target environment
5. **Enable Notifications** - Slack/Email alerts
6. **Monitor** - Track build success rate

---

## Summary

✅ **GitHub Actions** - Cloud-native CI/CD  
✅ **Jenkins** - Self-hosted pipeline  
✅ **Multi-Platform** - AMD64 & ARM64 support  
✅ **Security Scanning** - Trivy integration  
✅ **Automated Deployment** - Main branch auto-deploy  
✅ **Health Monitoring** - Post-deployment checks  

Both pipelines are production-ready and fully automated!
